docs/public/installation.rst, before:

####################
TT-BUDA Installation
####################

Overview
********

The TT-BUDA software stack can compile models from several different frameworks and execute them in many different ways on Tenstorrent hardware.

This user guide is intended to help you setup your system with the appropriate device drivers, firmware, system dependencies, and compiler / runtime software.

**Note on terminology:**

While TT-BUDA is the official Tenstorrent AI/ML compiler stack, PyBUDA is the Python interface for TT-BUDA. TT-BUDA is the core technology; however, PyBUDA allows users to access and utilize TT-BUDA's features directly from Python. This includes directly importing model architectures and weights from PyTorch, TensorFlow, ONNX, and TFLite.

Prerequisites
*************

OS Compatibility
----------------

Presently, Tenstorrent software is only supported on the **Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal Fossa)** operating system.

Download
********

To access the PyBUDA software and associated files, please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda.

To install a release, please go to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/releases. Once you have identified the release version you would like to install, you can download the individual files by clicking on their name.

Install
*******

PyBUDA releases can be installed using two methods: `Python virtualenv <#python-environment-installation>`_ or `Docker <#docker-container-installation>`_. PyBUDA can be installed from source following the Python virtualenv method.

Python Environment Installation
-------------------------------

It is strongly recommended to use virtual environments for each project utilizing PyBUDA and Python dependencies. Creating a new virtual environment with PyBUDA and libraries is very easy.

Prerequisites (detailed sections below) for python envirnment installation are listed here:

  * `Setup HugePages (below) <#setup-hugepages>`_
  * `PCI Driver Installation (below) <#pci-driver-installation>`_
  * `Device Firmware Update (below) <#device-firmware-update>`_
  * `Backend Compiler Dependencies (below) <#backend-compiler-dependencies>`_
  * `Additional PyBUDA Compile Dependencies (below) <#additional-pybuda-compile-dependencies>`_
  * `Tenstorrent Software Package (below) <#tenstorrent-software-package>`_.

To install a PyBUDA release, follow these steps:

* Step 1. Navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/releases and download the latest release `pybuda` and `tvm` wheel files
* Step 2. Create your Python environment in desired directory

.. code-block:: bash

  python3 -m venv env

* Step 3. Activate environment

.. code-block:: bash

  source env/bin/activate

* Step 4. Pip install PyBuda and TVM
If you have downloaded the latest release wheel files, you can install them directly with pip.

.. code-block:: bash

  pip install pybuda-<version>.whl tvm-<version>.whl

To compile PyBUDA from source, follow these steps:

* Step 1. Clone PyBUDA from https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/
* Step 2. Update submodules

.. code-block:: bash

  cd tt-buda
  git submodule update --init --recursive

* Step 3. Compile. PyBUDA's make system will automatically create the needed venv

.. code-block:: bash
  make
  source  build/python_env/bin/activate


Docker Container Installation
-----------------------------

Alternatively, PyBUDA and its dependencies are provided as Docker images which can run in separate containers.

Prerequisites (detailed sections below) for docker installation are listed here:

 * `PCI Driver Installation (below) <#pci-driver-installation>`_
 * `Device Firmware Update (below) <#device-firmware-update>`_

* Step 1. Setup a personal access token (classic)

Create a personal access token from: https://github.com/settings/tokens.
Give the token the permissions to read packages from the container registry ``read:packages``.

* Step 2. Login to Docker Registry

.. code-block:: bash

  GITHUB_TOKEN=<your token>
  echo $GITHUB_TOKEN | sudo docker login ghcr.io -u <your github username> --password-stdin

* Step 3. Pull the image

.. code-block:: bash

  sudo docker pull ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-buda/<TAG>

* Step 4. Run the container

.. code-block:: bash

  sudo docker run --rm -ti --shm-size=4g --device /dev/tenstorrent -v /dev/hugepages-1G:/dev/hugepages-1G -v `pwd`/:/home/ ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-buda/<TAG> bash

* Step 5. Change root directory

.. code-block:: bash

  cd home/

Installation Prerequisites
**************************

Setup HugePages
---------------

.. code-block:: bash

  NUM_DEVICES=$(lspci -d 1e52: | wc -l)
  sudo sed -i "s/^GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT=.*$/GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT=\"hugepagesz=1G hugepages=${NUM_DEVICES} nr_hugepages=${NUM_DEVICES} iommu=pt\"/g" /etc/default/grub
  sudo update-grub
  sudo sed -i "/\s\/dev\/hugepages-1G\s/d" /etc/fstab; echo "hugetlbfs /dev/hugepages-1G hugetlbfs pagesize=1G,rw,mode=777 0 0" | sudo tee -a /etc/fstab
  sudo reboot

PCI Driver Installation
-----------------------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-kmd and follow the readme to install the kernel mode PCI driver.

Device Firmware Update
----------------------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-flash and https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-firmware-gs to download a utility for flashing device firmwares and the firmware itself.  Follow respective readmes for setup and installation.

Backend Compiler Dependencies
-----------------------------

Instructions to install the Tenstorrent backend compiler dependencies on a fresh install of Ubuntu Server.

You may need to append each ``apt-get`` command with ``sudo`` if you do not have root permissions.

.. code-block:: bash

  apt-get update -y && apt-get upgrade -y --no-install-recommends
  apt-get install -y software-properties-common
  apt-get install -y python3.8-venv libboost-all-dev libgoogle-glog-dev libgl1-mesa-glx ruby
  apt-get install -y build-essential clang-6.0 libhdf5-serial-dev libzmq3-dev

Additional PyBUDA Compile Dependencies
-----------------------------

OS Level Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Additional dependencies to compile PyBUDA from source after running `Backend Compiler Dependencies <#backend-compiler-dependencies>`_

You may need to append each ``apt-get`` command with ``sudo`` if you do not have root permissions.

.. code-block:: bash

  apt-get install -y libyaml-cpp-dev python3-pip sudo git git-lfs
  apt-get install -y wget cmake cmake-data libgtest-dev libgmock-dev
  pip3 install pyyaml

Package Level Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition, if you intend to utilize ``torchvision`` for your model development, we strongly recommend installing it using a specific method that ensures optimal compatibility with PyBUDA. This method involves building and installing `torchvision` from its source code, which allows for the necessary dependencies and configurations to be correctly set up.

To do this, you should use the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

  export TORCH_VISION_INSTALL=1
  make torchvision

The ``export TORCH_VISION_INSTALL=1`` command sets an environment variable that our Makefile script uses to determine whether to install ``torchvision``. By setting this variable to 1, you're instructing the script to proceed with the ``torchvision`` installation.

The ``make torchvision`` command then triggers the build and installation process. This process includes cloning the ``torchvision`` repository, checking out the desired version, and building ``torchvision`` using its ``setup.py`` script.

By following these steps, ``torchvision`` will be installed in a way that ensures it works effectively with PyBUDA.

.. note::

  The ``TORCH_VISION_INSTALL`` flag is not limited to the ``make torchvision`` command. It can also be used with the standard ``make build`` command. When this flag is set to 1, the build process will include the installation of ``torchvision``, regardless of the specific ``make`` command used. This allows for flexibility in your build process, enabling you to include or exclude the ``torchvision`` installation as needed.

.. note::

  For your convenience, the ``torchvision`` wheel file is already included in the PyBUDA release bundle. This means that if you're using the release bundle, you won't need to build ``torchvision`` from source unless you want to use a different version or need to modify the source code. Simply install the provided wheel file using pip to add ``torchvision`` to your Python environment.

  Here's an example of how you can install the ``torchvision`` wheel file:

  .. code-block:: bash

    pip install /path/to/your/wheel/file/torchvision*.whl

  Replace ``/path/to/your/wheel/file/torchvision*.whl`` with the actual path to the ``torchvision`` wheel file in the PyBUDA release bundle.

TT-SMI
------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-smi to get Tenstorrent's System Management Interface tool. A command line utility to interact with all Tenstorrent devices on host.

Tenstorrent Software Package
----------------------------

Acquire pybuda and associated software from the aforementioned `Download <#download>`_ section.

Relevant files:

.. code-block:: bash

  pybuda-<version>.whl   <- Latest PyBUDA Release
  tvm-<version>.whl      <- Latest TVM Release


Smoke Test
**********

With your Python environment with PyBUDA install activated, run the following Python script:

.. code-block:: python

  import pybuda
  import torch


  # Sample PyTorch module
  class PyTorchTestModule(torch.nn.Module):
      def __init__(self):
          super().__init__()
          self.weights1 = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(32, 32), requires_grad=True)
          self.weights2 = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(32, 32), requires_grad=True)
      def forward(self, act1, act2):
          m1 = torch.matmul(act1, self.weights1)
          m2 = torch.matmul(act2, self.weights2)
          return m1 + m2, m1


  def test_module_direct_pytorch():
      input1 = torch.rand(4, 32, 32)
      input2 = torch.rand(4, 32, 32)
      # Run single inference pass on a PyTorch module, using a wrapper to convert to PyBUDA first
      output = pybuda.PyTorchModule("direct_pt", PyTorchTestModule()).run(input1, input2)
      print(output)


  if __name__ == "__main__":
      test_module_direct_pytorch()

Commit message:

Update public installation document
(cherry picked from commit d9c7f954ae480800e602f31d779f6dbc084151b5)

docs/public/installation.rst, after:

####################
TT-BUDA Installation
####################

Overview
********

The TT-BUDA software stack can compile models from several different frameworks and execute them in many different ways on Tenstorrent hardware.

This user guide is intended to help you setup your system with the appropriate device drivers, firmware, system dependencies, and compiler / runtime software.

**Note on terminology:**

While TT-BUDA is the official Tenstorrent AI/ML compiler stack, PyBUDA is the Python interface for TT-BUDA. TT-BUDA is the core technology; however, PyBUDA allows users to access and utilize TT-BUDA's features directly from Python. This includes directly importing model architectures and weights from PyTorch, TensorFlow, ONNX, and TFLite.

Prerequisites
*************

OS Compatibility
----------------

Presently, Tenstorrent software is only supported on the **Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal Fossa)** operating system.

Download
********

To access the PyBUDA software and associated files, please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda.

To install a release, please go to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/releases. Once you have identified the release version you would like to install, you can download the individual files by clicking on their name.

Install
*******

PyBUDA releases can be installed using two methods: `Python virtualenv <#python-environment-installation>`_ or `Docker <#docker-container-installation>`_. PyBUDA can be installed from source following the Python virtualenv method.

Python Environment Installation
-------------------------------

It is strongly recommended to use virtual environments for each project utilizing PyBUDA and Python dependencies. Creating a new virtual environment with PyBUDA and libraries is very easy.

Prerequisites (detailed sections below) for python envirnment installation are listed here:

  * `Setup HugePages (below) <#setup-hugepages>`_
  * `PCI Driver Installation (below) <#pci-driver-installation>`_
  * `Device Firmware Update (below) <#device-firmware-update>`_
  * `Backend Compiler Dependencies (below) <#backend-compiler-dependencies>`_
  * `Additional PyBUDA Compile Dependencies (below) <#additional-pybuda-compile-dependencies>`_
  * `Tenstorrent Software Package (below) <#tenstorrent-software-package>`_.

To install a PyBUDA release, follow these steps:

* Step 1. Navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/releases and download the latest release `pybuda` and `tvm` wheel files
* Step 2. Create your Python environment in desired directory

.. code-block:: bash

  python3 -m venv env

* Step 3. Activate environment

.. code-block:: bash

  source env/bin/activate

* Step 4. Pip install PyBuda and TVM

If you have downloaded the latest release wheel files, you can install them directly with pip.

.. code-block:: bash

  pip install pybuda-<version>.whl tvm-<version>.whl

To compile PyBUDA from source, follow these steps:

* Step 1. Clone PyBUDA from https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-buda/

* Step 2. Update submodules

.. code-block:: bash

  cd tt-buda
  git submodule update --init --recursive

* Step 3. Compile. PyBUDA's make system will automatically create the needed venv

.. code-block:: bash

  make
  source  build/python_env/bin/activate


Docker Container Installation
-----------------------------

Alternatively, PyBUDA and its dependencies are provided as Docker images which can run in separate containers.

Prerequisites (detailed sections below) for docker installation are listed here:

 * `PCI Driver Installation (below) <#pci-driver-installation>`_
 * `Device Firmware Update (below) <#device-firmware-update>`_

* Step 1. Setup a personal access token (classic)

Create a personal access token from: https://github.com/settings/tokens.
Give the token the permissions to read packages from the container registry ``read:packages``.

* Step 2. Login to Docker Registry

.. code-block:: bash

  GITHUB_TOKEN=<your token>
  echo $GITHUB_TOKEN | sudo docker login ghcr.io -u <your github username> --password-stdin

* Step 3. Pull the image

.. code-block:: bash

  sudo docker pull ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-buda/<TAG>

* Step 4. Run the container

.. code-block:: bash

  sudo docker run --rm -ti --shm-size=4g --device /dev/tenstorrent -v /dev/hugepages-1G:/dev/hugepages-1G -v `pwd`/:/home/ ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-buda/<TAG> bash

* Step 5. Change root directory

.. code-block:: bash

  cd home/

Installation Prerequisites
**************************

Setup HugePages
---------------

.. code-block:: bash

  NUM_DEVICES=$(lspci -d 1e52: | wc -l)
  sudo sed -i "s/^GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT=.*$/GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT=\"hugepagesz=1G hugepages=${NUM_DEVICES} nr_hugepages=${NUM_DEVICES} iommu=pt\"/g" /etc/default/grub
  sudo update-grub
  sudo sed -i "/\s\/dev\/hugepages-1G\s/d" /etc/fstab; echo "hugetlbfs /dev/hugepages-1G hugetlbfs pagesize=1G,rw,mode=777 0 0" | sudo tee -a /etc/fstab
  sudo reboot

PCI Driver Installation
-----------------------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-kmd and follow the readme to install the kernel mode PCI driver.

Device Firmware Update
----------------------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-flash and https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-firmware-gs to download a utility for flashing device firmwares and the firmware itself.  Follow respective readmes for setup and installation.

Backend Compiler Dependencies
-----------------------------

Instructions to install the Tenstorrent backend compiler dependencies on a fresh install of Ubuntu Server.

You may need to append each ``apt-get`` command with ``sudo`` if you do not have root permissions.

.. code-block:: bash

  apt-get update -y && apt-get upgrade -y --no-install-recommends
  apt-get install -y software-properties-common
  apt-get install -y python3.8-venv libboost-all-dev libgoogle-glog-dev libgl1-mesa-glx ruby
  apt-get install -y build-essential clang-6.0 libhdf5-serial-dev libzmq3-dev

Additional PyBUDA Compile Dependencies
--------------------------------------

OS Level Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Additional dependencies to compile PyBUDA from source after running `Backend Compiler Dependencies <#backend-compiler-dependencies>`_

You may need to append each ``apt-get`` command with ``sudo`` if you do not have root permissions.

.. code-block:: bash

  apt-get install -y libyaml-cpp-dev python3-pip sudo git git-lfs
  apt-get install -y wget cmake cmake-data
  pip3 install pyyaml

Package Level Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition, if you intend to utilize ``torchvision`` for your model development, we strongly recommend installing it using a specific method that ensures optimal compatibility with PyBUDA. This method involves building and installing `torchvision` from its source code, which allows for the necessary dependencies and configurations to be correctly set up.

To do this, you should use the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

  export TORCH_VISION_INSTALL=1
  make torchvision

The ``export TORCH_VISION_INSTALL=1`` command sets an environment variable that our Makefile script uses to determine whether to install ``torchvision``. By setting this variable to 1, you're instructing the script to proceed with the ``torchvision`` installation.

The ``make torchvision`` command then triggers the build and installation process. This process includes cloning the ``torchvision`` repository, checking out the desired version, and building ``torchvision`` using its ``setup.py`` script.

By following these steps, ``torchvision`` will be installed in a way that ensures it works effectively with PyBUDA.

.. note::

  The ``TORCH_VISION_INSTALL`` flag is not limited to the ``make torchvision`` command. It can also be used with the standard ``make build`` command. When this flag is set to 1, the build process will include the installation of ``torchvision``, regardless of the specific ``make`` command used. This allows for flexibility in your build process, enabling you to include or exclude the ``torchvision`` installation as needed.

.. note::

  For your convenience, the ``torchvision`` wheel file is already included in the PyBUDA release bundle. This means that if you're using the release bundle, you won't need to build ``torchvision`` from source unless you want to use a different version or need to modify the source code. Simply install the provided wheel file using pip to add ``torchvision`` to your Python environment.

  Here's an example of how you can install the ``torchvision`` wheel file:

  .. code-block:: bash

    pip install /path/to/your/wheel/file/torchvision*.whl

  Replace ``/path/to/your/wheel/file/torchvision*.whl`` with the actual path to the ``torchvision`` wheel file in the PyBUDA release bundle.

.. note::

  To run the existing unit tests of PyBUDA components, e.g. after compiling it from source, you need to install the following packages.

  .. code-block:: bash

    apt-get install -y wget libgtest-dev libgmock-dev

TT-SMI
------

Please navigate to https://github.com/tenstorrent/tt-smi to get Tenstorrent's System Management Interface tool. A command line utility to interact with all Tenstorrent devices on host.

Tenstorrent Software Package
----------------------------

Acquire pybuda and associated software from the aforementioned `Download <#download>`_ section.

Relevant files:

.. code-block:: bash

  pybuda-<version>.whl   <- Latest PyBUDA Release
  tvm-<version>.whl      <- Latest TVM Release


Smoke Test
**********

With your Python environment with PyBUDA install activated, run the following Python script:

.. code-block:: python

  import pybuda
  import torch


  # Sample PyTorch module
  class PyTorchTestModule(torch.nn.Module):
      def __init__(self):
          super().__init__()
          self.weights1 = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(32, 32), requires_grad=True)
          self.weights2 = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(32, 32), requires_grad=True)
      def forward(self, act1, act2):
          m1 = torch.matmul(act1, self.weights1)
          m2 = torch.matmul(act2, self.weights2)
          return m1 + m2, m1


  def test_module_direct_pytorch():
      input1 = torch.rand(4, 32, 32)
      input2 = torch.rand(4, 32, 32)
      # Run single inference pass on a PyTorch module, using a wrapper to convert to PyBUDA first
      output = pybuda.PyTorchModule("direct_pt", PyTorchTestModule()).run(input1, input2)
      print(output)


  if __name__ == "__main__":
      test_module_direct_pytorch()
